Gwendolen.  [Still standing up.]  I may call you Cecily, may I not?

Cecily.  With pleasure!

Gwendolen.  And you will always call me Gwendolen, won't you?

Cecily.  If you wish.

Gwendolen.  Then that is all quite settled, is it not?

Cecily.  I hope so.  [A pause.  They both sit down together.]

Gwendolen.  Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my
mentioning who I am.  My father is Lord Bracknell.  You have never heard
of papa, I suppose?

Cecily.  I don't think so.

Gwendolen.  Outside the family circle, papa, I am glad to say, is
entirely unknown.  I think that is quite as it should be.  The home seems
to me to be the proper sphere for the man.  And certainly once a man
begins to neglect his domestic duties he becomes painfully effeminate,
does he not?  And I don't like that.  It makes men so very attractive.
Cecily, mamma, whose views on education are remarkably strict, has
brought me up to be extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so
do you mind my looking at you through my glasses?

Cecily.  Oh! not at all, Gwendolen.  I am very fond of being looked at.

Gwendolen.  [After examining Cecily carefully through a lorgnette.]  You
are here on a short visit, I suppose.

Cecily.  Oh no!  I live here.

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Really?  Your mother, no doubt, or some female
relative of advanced years, resides here also?

Cecily.  Oh no!  I have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.

Gwendolen.  Indeed?

Cecily.  My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the
arduous task of looking after me.

Gwendolen.  Your guardian?

Cecily.  Yes, I am Mr. Worthing's ward.

Gwendolen.  Oh!  It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a
ward.  How secretive of him!  He grows more interesting hourly.  I am not
sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed
delight.  [Rising and going to her.]  I am very fond of you, Cecily; I
have liked you ever since I met you!  But I am bound to state that now
that I know that you are Mr. Worthing's ward, I cannot help expressing a
wish you were--well, just a little older than you seem to be--and not
quite so very alluring in appearance.  In fact, if I may speak candidly--

Cecily.  Pray do!  I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to
say, one should always be quite candid.

Gwendolen.  Well, to speak with perfect candour, Cecily, I wish that you
were fully forty-two, and more than usually plain for your age.  Ernest
has a strong upright nature.  He is the very soul of truth and honour.
Disloyalty would be as impossible to him as deception.  But even men of
the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the
influence of the physical charms of others.  Modern, no less than Ancient
History, supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to.
If it were not so, indeed, History would be quite unreadable.

Cecily.  I beg your pardon, Gwendolen, did you say Ernest?

Gwendolen.  Yes.

Cecily.  Oh, but it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is my guardian.  It is
his brother--his elder brother.

Gwendolen.  [Sitting down again.]  Ernest never mentioned to me that he
had a brother.

Cecily.  I am sorry to say they have not been on good terms for a long
time.

Gwendolen.  Ah! that accounts for it.  And now that I think of it I have
never heard any man mention his brother.  The subject seems distasteful
to most men.  Cecily, you have lifted a load from my mind.  I was growing
almost anxious.  It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across
a friendship like ours, would it not?  Of course you are quite, quite
sure that it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is your guardian?

Cecily.  Quite sure.  [A pause.]  In fact, I am going to be his.

Gwendolen.  [Inquiringly.]  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  [Rather shy and confidingly.]  Dearest Gwendolen, there is no
reason why I should make a secret of it to you.  Our little county
newspaper is sure to chronicle the fact next week.  Mr. Ernest Worthing
and I are engaged to be married.

Gwendolen.  [Quite politely, rising.]  My darling Cecily, I think there
must be some slight error.  Mr. Ernest Worthing is engaged to me.  The
announcement will appear in the _Morning Post_ on Saturday at the latest.

Cecily.  [Very politely, rising.]  I am afraid you must be under some
misconception.  Ernest proposed to me exactly ten minutes ago.  [Shows
diary.]

Gwendolen.  [Examines diary through her lorgnettte carefully.]  It is
certainly very curious, for he asked me to be his wife yesterday
afternoon at 5.30.  If you would care to verify the incident, pray do so.
[Produces diary of her own.]  I never travel without my diary.  One
should always have something sensational to read in the train.  I am so
sorry, dear Cecily, if it is any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I
have the prior claim.

Cecily.  It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen,
if it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to
point out that since Ernest proposed to you he clearly has changed his
mind.

Gwendolen.  [Meditatively.]  If the poor fellow has been entrapped into
any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once,
and with a firm hand.

Cecily.  [Thoughtfully and sadly.]  Whatever unfortunate entanglement my
dear boy may have got into, I will never reproach him with it after we
are married.

Gwendolen.  Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement?  You
are presumptuous.  On an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a
moral duty to speak one's mind.  It becomes a pleasure.

Cecily.  Do you suggest, Miss Fairfax, that I entrapped Ernest into an
engagement?  How dare you?  This is no time for wearing the shallow mask
of manners.  When I see a spade I call it a spade.

Gwendolen.  [Satirically.]  I am glad to say that I have never seen a
spade.  It is obvious that our social spheres have been widely different.

[Enter Merriman, followed by the footman.  He carries a salver, table
cloth, and plate stand.  Cecily is about to retort.  The presence of the
servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls
chafe.]

Merriman.  Shall I lay tea here as usual, Miss?

Cecily.  [Sternly, in a calm voice.]  Yes, as usual.  [Merriman begins to
clear table and lay cloth.  A long pause.  Cecily and Gwendolen glare at
each other.]

Gwendolen.  Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss
Cardew?

Cecily.  Oh! yes! a great many.  From the top of one of the hills quite
close one can see five counties.

Gwendolen.  Five counties!  I don't think I should like that; I hate
crowds.

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  I suppose that is why you live in town?  [Gwendolen
bites her lip, and beats her foot nervously with her parasol.]

Gwendolen.  [Looking round.]  Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss
Cardew.

Cecily.  So glad you like it, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.

Cecily.  Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in
London.

Gwendolen.  Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist
in the country, if anybody who is anybody does.  The country always bores
me to death.

Cecily.  Ah!  This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression,
is it not?  I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it
just at present.  It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been
told.  May I offer you some tea, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  [With elaborate politeness.]  Thank you.  [Aside.]  Detestable
girl!  But I require tea!

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  Sugar?

Gwendolen.  [Superciliously.]  No, thank you.  Sugar is not fashionable
any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up the tongs and puts four
lumps of sugar into the cup.]

Cecily.  [Severely.]  Cake or bread and butter?

Gwendolen.  [In a bored manner.]  Bread and butter, please.  Cake is
rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.

Cecily.  [Cuts a very large slice of cake, and puts it on the tray.]  Hand
that to Miss Fairfax.

[Merriman does so, and goes out with footman.  Gwendolen drinks the tea
and makes a grimace.  Puts down cup at once, reaches out her hand to the
bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake.  Rises in
indignation.]

Gwendolen.  You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I
asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake.  I am
known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary
sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.

Cecily.  [Rising.]  To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the
machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not
go.

Gwendolen.  From the moment I saw you I distrusted you.  I felt that you
were false and deceitful.  I am never deceived in such matters.  My first
impressions of people are invariably right.

Cecily.  It seems to me, Miss Fairfax, that I am trespassing on your
valuable time.  No doubt you have many other calls of a similar character
to make in the neighbourhood.

[Enter Jack.]

Gwendolen.  [Catching sight of him.]  Ernest!  My own Ernest!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  Darling!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Gwendolen.  [Draws back.]  A moment!  May I ask if you are engaged to be
married to this young lady?  [Points to Cecily.]

Jack.  [Laughing.]  To dear little Cecily!  Of course not!  What could
have put such an idea into your pretty little head?

Gwendolen.  Thank you.  You may!  [Offers her cheek.]

Cecily.  [Very sweetly.]  I knew there must be some misunderstanding,
Miss Fairfax.  The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is
my guardian, Mr. John Worthing.

Gwendolen.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  This is Uncle Jack.

Gwendolen.  [Receding.]  Jack!  Oh!

[Enter Algernon.]

Cecily.  Here is Ernest.

Algernon.  [Goes straight over to Cecily without noticing any one else.]
My own love!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Cecily.  [Drawing back.]  A moment, Ernest!  May I ask you--are you
engaged to be married to this young lady?

Algernon.  [Looking round.]  To what young lady?  Good heavens!
Gwendolen!

Cecily.  Yes! to good heavens, Gwendolen, I mean to Gwendolen.

Algernon.  [Laughing.]  Of course not!  What could have put such an idea
into your pretty little head?

Cecily.  Thank you.  [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.]  You may.
[Algernon kisses her.]

Gwendolen.  I felt there was some slight error, Miss Cardew.  The
gentleman who is now embracing you is my cousin, Mr. Algernon Moncrieff.

Cecily.  [Breaking away from Algernon.]  Algernon Moncrieff!  Oh!  [The
two girls move towards each other and put their arms round each other's
waists as if for protection.]

Cecily.  Are you called Algernon?

Algernon.  I cannot deny it.

Cecily.  Oh!

Gwendolen.  Is your name really John?

Jack.  [Standing rather proudly.]  I could deny it if I liked.  I could
deny anything if I liked.  But my name certainly is John.  It has been
John for years.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  A gross deception has been practised on both of
us.

Gwendolen.  My poor wounded Cecily!

Cecily.  My sweet wronged Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  [Slowly and seriously.]  You will call me sister, will you
not?  [They embrace.  Jack and Algernon groan and walk up and down.]

Cecily.  [Rather brightly.]  There is just one question I would like to
be allowed to ask my guardian.

Gwendolen.  An admirable idea!  Mr. Worthing, there is just one question
I would like to be permitted to put to you.  Where is your brother
Ernest?  We are both engaged to be married to your brother Ernest, so it
is a matter of some importance to us to know where your brother Ernest is
at present.

Jack.  [Slowly and hesitatingly.]  Gwendolen--Cecily--it is very painful
for me to be forced to speak the truth.  It is the first time in my life
that I have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really
quite inexperienced in doing anything of the kind.  However, I will tell
you quite frankly that I have no brother Ernest.  I have no brother at
all.  I never had a brother in my life, and I certainly have not the
smallest intention of ever having one in the future.

Cecily.  [Surprised.]  No brother at all?

Jack.  [Cheerily.]  None!

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Had you never a brother of any kind?

Jack.  [Pleasantly.]  Never.  Not even of an kind.

Gwendolen.  I am afraid it is quite clear, Cecily, that neither of us is
engaged to be married to any one.

Cecily.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to
find herself in.  Is it?

Gwendolen.  Let us go into the house.  They will hardly venture to come
after us there.

Cecily.  No, men are so cowardly, aren't they?

[They retire into the house with scornful looks.]

Jack.  This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I
suppose?

Algernon.  Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is.  The most
wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.

Jack.  Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.

Algernon.  That is absurd.  One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one
chooses.  Every serious Bunburyist knows that.

Jack.  Serious Bunburyist!  Good heavens!

Algernon.  Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life.  I happen to be serious about Bunburying.
What on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea.
About everything, I should fancy.  You have such an absolutely trivial
nature.

Jack.  Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this
wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded.  You
won't be able to run down to the country quite so often as you used to
do, dear Algy.  And a very good thing too.

Algernon.  Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear Jack?  You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was.  And not a bad thing either.

Jack.  As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your
taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my ward.

Algernon.  I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a
brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss Fairfax.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin.

Jack.  I wanted to be engaged to Gwendolen, that is all.  I love her.

Algernon.  Well, I simply wanted to be engaged to Cecily.  I adore her.

Jack.  There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.

Algernon.  I don't think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss
Fairfax being united.

Jack.  Well, that is no business of yours.

Algernon.  If it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it.  [Begins to
eat muffins.]  It is very vulgar to talk about one's business.  Only
people like stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties.

Jack.  How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this
horrible trouble, I can't make out.  You seem to me to be perfectly
heartless.

Algernon.  Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner.  The butter
would probably get on my cuffs.  One should always eat muffins quite
calmly.  It is the only way to eat them.

Jack.  I say it's perfectly heartless your eating muffins at all, under
the circumstances.

Algernon.  When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles
me.  Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me
intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.  At
the present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy.  Besides, I
am particularly fond of muffins.  [Rising.]

Jack.  [Rising.]  Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in
that greedy way. [Takes muffins from Algernon.]

Algernon.  [Offering tea-cake.]  I wish you would have tea-cake instead.
I don't like tea-cake.

Jack.  Good heavens!  I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own
garden.

Algernon.  But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat
muffins.

Jack.  I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances.
That is a very different thing.

Algernon.  That may be.  But the muffins are the same.  [He seizes the
muffin-dish from Jack.]

Jack.  Algy, I wish to goodness you would go.

Algernon.  You can't possibly ask me to go without having some dinner.
It's absurd.  I never go without my dinner.  No one ever does, except
vegetarians and people like that.  Besides I have just made arrangements
with Dr. Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of
Ernest.

Jack.  My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better.  I
made arrangements this morning with Dr. Chasuble to be christened myself
at 5.30, and I naturally will take the name of Ernest.  Gwendolen would
wish it.  We can't both be christened Ernest.  It's absurd.  Besides, I
have a perfect right to be christened if I like.  There is no evidence at
all that I have ever been christened by anybody.  I should think it
extremely probable I never was, and so does Dr. Chasuble.  It is entirely
different in your case.  You have been christened already.

Algernon.  Yes, but I have not been christened for years.

Jack.  Yes, but you have been christened.  That is the important thing.

Algernon.  Quite so.  So I know my constitution can stand it.  If you are
not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think
it rather dangerous your venturing on it now.  It might make you very
unwell.  You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely
connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a
severe chill.

Jack.  Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.

Algernon.  It usen't to be, I know--but I daresay it is now.  Science is
always making wonderful improvements in things.

Jack.  [Picking up the muffin-dish.]  Oh, that is nonsense; you are
always talking nonsense.

Algernon.  Jack, you are at the muffins again!  I wish you wouldn't.
There are only two left.  [Takes them.]  I told you I was particularly
fond of muffins.

Jack.  But I hate tea-cake.

Algernon.  Why on earth then do you allow tea-cake to be served up for
your guests?  What ideas you have of hospitality!

Jack.  Algernon!  I have already told you to go.  I don't want you here.
Why don't you go!

Algernon.  I haven't quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one
muffin left.  [Jack groans, and sinks into a chair.  Algernon still
continues eating.]

ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


Morning-room at the Manor House.

[Gwendolen and Cecily are at the window, looking out into the garden.]

Gwendolen.  The fact that they did not follow us at once into the house,
as any one else would have done, seems to me to show that they have some
sense of shame left.

Cecily.  They have been eating muffins.  That looks like repentance.

Gwendolen.  [After a pause.]  They don't seem to notice us at all.
Couldn't you cough?

Cecily.  But I haven't got a cough.

Gwendolen.  They're looking at us.  What effrontery!

Cecily.  They're approaching.  That's very forward of them.

Gwendolen.  Let us preserve a dignified silence.

Cecily.  Certainly.  It's the only thing to do now.  [Enter Jack followed
by Algernon.  They whistle some dreadful popular air from a British
Opera.]

Gwendolen.  This dignified silence seems to produce an unpleasant effect.

Cecily.  A most distasteful one.

Gwendolen.  But we will not be the first to speak.

Cecily.  Certainly not.

Gwendolen.  Mr. Worthing, I have something very particular to ask you.
Much depends on your reply.

Cecily.  Gwendolen, your common sense is invaluable.  Mr. Moncrieff,
kindly answer me the following question.  Why did you pretend to be my
guardian's brother?

Algernon.  In order that I might have an opportunity of meeting you.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  That certainly seems a satisfactory
explanation, does it not?

Gwendolen.  Yes, dear, if you can believe him.

Cecily.  I don't.  But that does not affect the wonderful beauty of his
answer.

Gwendolen.  True.  In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity
is the vital thing.  Mr. Worthing, what explanation can you offer to me
for pretending to have a brother?  Was it in order that you might have an
opportunity of coming up to town to see me as often as possible?

Jack.  Can you doubt it, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  I have the gravest doubts upon the subject.  But I intend to
crush them.  This is not the moment for German scepticism.  [Moving to
Cecily.]  Their explanations appear to be quite satisfactory, especially
Mr. Worthing's.  That seems to me to have the stamp of truth upon it.

Cecily.  I am more than content with what Mr. Moncrieff said.  His voice
alone inspires one with absolute credulity.

Gwendolen.  Then you think we should forgive them?

Cecily.  Yes.  I mean no.

Gwendolen.  True!  I had forgotten.  There are principles at stake that
one cannot surrender.  Which of us should tell them?  The task is not a
pleasant one.

Cecily.  Could we not both speak at the same time?

Gwendolen.  An excellent idea!  I nearly always speak at the same time as
other people.  Will you take the time from me?

Cecily.  Certainly.  [Gwendolen beats time with uplifted finger.]

Gwendolen and Cecily [Speaking together.]  Your Christian names are still
an insuperable barrier.  That is all!

Jack and Algernon [Speaking together.]  Our Christian names!  Is that
all?  But we are going to be christened this afternoon.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  For my sake you are prepared to do this terrible
thing?

Jack.  I am.

Cecily.  [To Algernon.]  To please me you are ready to face this fearful
ordeal?

Algernon.  I am!

Gwendolen.  How absurd to talk of the equality of the sexes!  Where
questions of self-sacrifice are concerned, men are infinitely beyond us.

Jack.  We are.  [Clasps hands with Algernon.]

Cecily.  They have moments of physical courage of which we women know
absolutely nothing.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  Darling!

Algernon.  [To Cecily.]  Darling!  [They fall into each other's arms.]

[Enter Merriman.  When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.]

Merriman.  Ahem!  Ahem!  Lady Bracknell!

Jack.  Good heavens!

[Enter Lady Bracknell.  The couples separate in alarm.  Exit Merriman.]

Lady Bracknell.  Gwendolen!  What does this mean?

Gwendolen.  Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing,
mamma.

Lady Bracknell.  Come here.  Sit down.  Sit down immediately.  Hesitation
of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of physical weakness
in the old.  [Turns to Jack.]  Apprised, sir, of my daughter's sudden
flight by her trusty maid, whose confidence I purchased by means of a
small coin, I followed her at once by a luggage train.  Her unhappy
father is, I am glad to say, under the impression that she is attending a
more than usually lengthy lecture by the University Extension Scheme on
the Influence of a permanent income on Thought.  I do not propose to
undeceive him.  Indeed I have never undeceived him on any question.  I
would consider it wrong.  But of course, you will clearly understand that
all communication between yourself and my daughter must cease immediately
from this moment.  On this point, as indeed on all points, I am firm.

Jack.  I am engaged to be married to Gwendolen Lady Bracknell!

Lady Bracknell.  You are nothing of the kind, sir.  And now, as regards
Algernon! . . . Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  May I ask if it is in this house that your invalid
friend Mr. Bunbury resides?

Algernon.  [Stammering.]  Oh!  No!  Bunbury doesn't live here.  Bunbury
is somewhere else at present.  In fact, Bunbury is dead.

Lady Bracknell.  Dead!  When did Mr. Bunbury die?  His death must have
been extremely sudden.

Algernon.  [Airily.]  Oh!  I killed Bunbury this afternoon.  I mean poor
Bunbury died this afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  What did he die of?

Algernon.  Bunbury?  Oh, he was quite exploded.

Lady Bracknell.  Exploded!  Was he the victim of a revolutionary outrage?
I was not aware that Mr. Bunbury was interested in social legislation.  If
so, he is well punished for his morbidity.

Algernon.  My dear Aunt Augusta, I mean he was found out!  The doctors
found out that Bunbury could not live, that is what I mean--so Bunbury
died.

Lady Bracknell.  He seems to have had great confidence in the opinion of
his physicians.  I am glad, however, that he made up his mind at the last
to some definite course of action, and acted under proper medical advice.
And now that we have finally got rid of this Mr. Bunbury, may I ask, Mr.
Worthing, who is that young person whose hand my nephew Algernon is now
holding in what seems to me a peculiarly unnecessary manner?

Jack.  That lady is Miss Cecily Cardew, my ward.  [Lady Bracknell bows
coldly to Cecily.]

Algernon.  I am engaged to be married to Cecily, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  Mr. Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [With a shiver, crossing to the sofa and sitting down.]
I do not know whether there is anything peculiarly exciting in the air of
this particular part of Hertfordshire, but the number of engagements that
go on seems to me considerably above the proper average that statistics
have laid down for our guidance.  I think some preliminary inquiry on my
part would not be out of place.  Mr. Worthing, is Miss Cardew at all
connected with any of the larger railway stations in London?  I merely
desire information.  Until yesterday I had no idea that there were any
families or persons whose origin was a Terminus.  [Jack looks perfectly
furious, but restrains himself.]

Jack.  [In a clear, cold voice.]  Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of
the late Mr. Thomas Cardew of 149 Belgrave Square, S.W.; Gervase Park,
Dorking, Surrey; and the Sporran, Fifeshire, N.B.

Lady Bracknell.  That sounds not unsatisfactory.  Three addresses always
inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.  But what proof have I of their
authenticity?

Jack.  I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period.  They
are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [Grimly.]  I have known strange errors in that
publication.

Jack.  Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and
Markby.

Lady Bracknell.  Markby, Markby, and Markby?  A firm of the very highest
position in their profession.  Indeed I am told that one of the Mr.
Markby's is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties.  So far I am
satisfied.

Jack.  [Very irritably.]  How extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell!  I
have also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of
Miss Cardew's birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination,
confirmation, and the measles; both the German and the English variety.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah! A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps
somewhat too exciting for a young girl.  I am not myself in favour of
premature experiences.  [Rises, looks at her watch.]  Gwendolen! the time
approaches for our departure.  We have not a moment to lose.  As a matter
of form, Mr. Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little
fortune?

Jack.  Oh! about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the Funds.  That
is all.  Goodbye, Lady Bracknell.  So pleased to have seen you.

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down again.]  A moment, Mr. Worthing.  A
hundred and thirty thousand pounds!  And in the Funds!  Miss Cardew seems
to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her.  Few girls of
the present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qualities
that last, and improve with time.  We live, I regret to say, in an age of
surfaces.  [To Cecily.]  Come over here, dear.  [Cecily goes across.]
Pretty child! your dress is sadly simple, and your hair seems almost as
Nature might have left it.  But we can soon alter all that.  A thoroughly
experienced French maid produces a really marvellous result in a very
brief space of time.  I remember recommending one to young Lady Lancing,
and after three months her own husband did not know her.

Jack.  And after six months nobody knew her.

Lady Bracknell.  [Glares at Jack for a few moments.  Then bends, with a
practised smile, to Cecily.]  Kindly turn round, sweet child.  [Cecily
turns completely round.]  No, the side view is what I want.  [Cecily
presents her profile.]  Yes, quite as I expected.  There are distinct
social possibilities in your profile.  The two weak points in our age are
its want of principle and its want of profile.  The chin a little higher,
dear.  Style largely depends on the way the chin is worn.  They are worn
very high, just at present.  Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta!

Lady Bracknell.  There are distinct social possibilities in Miss Cardew's
profile.

Algernon.  Cecily is the sweetest, dearest, prettiest girl in the whole
world.  And I don't care twopence about social possibilities.

Lady Bracknell.  Never speak disrespectfully of Society, Algernon.  Only
people who can't get into it do that.  [To Cecily.]  Dear child, of
course you know that Algernon has nothing but his debts to depend upon.
But I do not approve of mercenary marriages.  When I married Lord
Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind.  But I never dreamed for a moment
of allowing that to stand in my way.  Well, I suppose I must give my
consent.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  Cecily, you may kiss me!

Cecily.  [Kisses her.]  Thank you, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  You may also address me as Aunt Augusta for the future.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  The marriage, I think, had better take place quite soon.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long
engagements.  They give people the opportunity of finding out each
other's character before marriage, which I think is never advisable.

Jack.  I beg your pardon for interrupting you, Lady Bracknell, but this
engagement is quite out of the question.  I am Miss Cardew's guardian,
and she cannot marry without my consent until she comes of age.  That
consent I absolutely decline to give.

Lady Bracknell.  Upon what grounds may I ask?  Algernon is an extremely,
I may almost say an ostentatiously, eligible young man.  He has nothing,
but he looks everything.  What more can one desire?

Jack.  It pains me very much to have to speak frankly to you, Lady
Bracknell, about your nephew, but the fact is that I do not approve at
all of his moral character.  I suspect him of being untruthful.  [Algernon
and Cecily look at him in indignant amazement.]

Lady Bracknell.  Untruthful!  My nephew Algernon?  Impossible!  He is an
Oxonian.

Jack.  I fear there can be no possible doubt about the matter.  This
afternoon during my temporary absence in London on an important question
of romance, he obtained admission to my house by means of the false
pretence of being my brother.  Under an assumed name he drank, I've just
been informed by my butler, an entire pint bottle of my Perrier-Jouet,
Brut, '89; wine I was specially reserving for myself.  Continuing his
disgraceful deception, he succeeded in the course of the afternoon in
alienating the affections of my only ward.  He subsequently stayed to
tea, and devoured every single muffin.  And what makes his conduct all
the more heartless is, that he was perfectly well aware from the first
that I have no brother, that I never had a brother, and that I don't
intend to have a brother, not even of any kind.  I distinctly told him so
myself yesterday afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, after careful consideration I have
decided entirely to overlook my nephew's conduct to you.

Jack.  That is very generous of you, Lady Bracknell.  My own decision,
however, is unalterable.  I decline to give my consent.

Lady Bracknell.  [To Cecily.]  Come here, sweet child.  [Cecily goes
over.]  How old are you, dear?

Cecily.  Well, I am really only eighteen, but I always admit to twenty
when I go to evening parties.

Lady Bracknell.  You are perfectly right in making some slight
alteration.  Indeed, no woman should ever be quite accurate about her
age.  It looks so calculating . . . [In a meditative manner.]  Eighteen,
but admitting to twenty at evening parties.  Well, it will not be very
long before you are of age and free from the restraints of tutelage.  So
I don't think your guardian's consent is, after all, a matter of any
importance.

Jack.  Pray excuse me, Lady Bracknell, for interrupting you again, but it
is only fair to tell you that according to the terms of her grandfather's
will Miss Cardew does not come legally of age till she is thirty-five.

Lady Bracknell.  That does not seem to me to be a grave objection.  Thirty-
five is a very attractive age.  London society is full of women of the
very highest birth who have, of their own free choice, remained thirty-
five for years.  Lady Dumbleton is an instance in point.  To my own
knowledge she has been thirty-five ever since she arrived at the age of
forty, which was many years ago now.  I see no reason why our dear Cecily
should not be even still more attractive at the age you mention than she
is at present.  There will be a large accumulation of property.

Cecily.  Algy, could you wait for me till I was thirty-five?

Algernon.  Of course I could, Cecily.  You know I could.

Cecily.  Yes, I felt it instinctively, but I couldn't wait all that time.
I hate waiting even five minutes for anybody.  It always makes me rather
cross.  I am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like punctuality in
others, and waiting, even to be married, is quite out of the question.

Algernon.  Then what is to be done, Cecily?

Cecily.  I don't know, Mr. Moncrieff.

Lady Bracknell.  My dear Mr. Worthing, as Miss Cardew states positively
that she cannot wait till she is thirty-five--a remark which I am bound
to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature--I would beg of
you to reconsider your decision.

Jack.  But my dear Lady Bracknell, the matter is entirely in your own
hands.  The moment you consent to my marriage with Gwendolen, I will most
gladly allow your nephew to form an alliance with my ward.

Lady Bracknell.  [Rising and drawing herself up.]  You must be quite
aware that what you propose is out of the question.

Jack.  Then a passionate celibacy is all that any of us can look forward
to.

Lady Bracknell.  That is not the destiny I propose for Gwendolen.
Algernon, of course, can choose for himself.  [Pulls out her watch.]
Come, dear, [Gwendolen rises] we have already missed five, if not six,
trains.  To miss any more might expose us to comment on the platform.

[Enter Dr. Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  Everything is quite ready for the christenings.

Lady Bracknell.  The christenings, sir!  Is not that somewhat premature?

Chasuble.  [Looking rather puzzled, and pointing to Jack and Algernon.]
Both these gentlemen have expressed a desire for immediate baptism.

Lady Bracknell.  At their age?  The idea is grotesque and irreligious!
Algernon, I forbid you to be baptized.  I will not hear of such excesses.
Lord Bracknell would be highly displeased if he learned that that was the
way in which you wasted your time and money.

Chasuble.  Am I to understand then that there are to be no christenings
at all this afternoon?

Jack.  I don't think that, as things are now, it would be of much
practical value to either of us, Dr. Chasuble.

Chasuble.  I am grieved to hear such sentiments from you, Mr. Worthing.
They savour of the heretical views of the Anabaptists, views that I have
completely refuted in four of my unpublished sermons.  However, as your
present mood seems to be one peculiarly secular, I will return to the
church at once.  Indeed, I have just been informed by the pew-opener that
for the last hour and a half Miss Prism has been waiting for me in the
vestry.

Lady Bracknell.  [Starting.]  Miss Prism!  Did I hear you mention a Miss
Prism?

Chasuble.  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I am on my way to join her.

Lady Bracknell.  Pray allow me to detain you for a moment.  This matter
may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and myself.  Is
this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected with
education?

Chasuble.  [Somewhat indignantly.]  She is the most cultivated of ladies,
and the very picture of respectability.

Lady Bracknell.  It is obviously the same person.  May I ask what
position she holds in your household?

Chasuble.  [Severely.]  I am a celibate, madam.

Jack.  [Interposing.]  Miss Prism, Lady Bracknell, has been for the last
three years Miss Cardew's esteemed governess and valued companion.

Lady Bracknell.  In spite of what I hear of her, I must see her at once.
Let her be sent for.

Chasuble.  [Looking off.]  She approaches; she is nigh.

[Enter Miss Prism hurriedly.]

Miss Prism.  I was told you expected me in the vestry, dear Canon.  I
have been waiting for you there for an hour and three-quarters.  [Catches
sight of Lady Bracknell, who has fixed her with a stony glare.  Miss
Prism grows pale and quails.  She looks anxiously round as if desirous to
escape.]

Lady Bracknell.  [In a severe, judicial voice.]  Prism!  [Miss Prism bows
her head in shame.]  Come here, Prism!  [Miss Prism approaches in a
humble manner.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [General consternation.  The
Canon starts back in horror.  Algernon and Jack pretend to be anxious to
shield Cecily and Gwendolen from hearing the details of a terrible public
scandal.]  Twenty-eight years ago, Prism, you left Lord Bracknell's
house, Number 104, Upper Grosvenor Street, in charge of a perambulator
that contained a baby of the male sex.  You never returned.  A few weeks
later, through the elaborate investigations of the Metropolitan police,
the perambulator was discovered at midnight, standing by itself in a
remote corner of Bayswater.  It contained the manuscript of a
three-volume novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality.  [Miss
Prism starts in involuntary indignation.]  But the baby was not there!
[Every one looks at Miss Prism.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [A pause.]

Miss Prism.  Lady Bracknell, I admit with shame that I do not know.  I
only wish I did.  The plain facts of the case are these.  On the morning
of the day you mention, a day that is for ever branded on my memory, I
prepared as usual to take the baby out in its perambulator.  I had also
with me a somewhat old, but capacious hand-bag in which I had intended to
place the manuscript of a work of fiction that I had written during my
few unoccupied hours.  In a moment of mental abstraction, for which I
never can forgive myself, I deposited the manuscript in the basinette,
and placed the baby in the hand-bag.

Jack.  [Who has been listening attentively.]  But where did you deposit
the hand-bag?

Miss Prism.  Do not ask me, Mr. Worthing.

Jack.  Miss Prism, this is a matter of no small importance to me.  I
insist on knowing where you deposited the hand-bag that contained that
infant.

Miss Prism.  I left it in the cloak-room of one of the larger railway
stations in London.

Jack.  What railway station?

Miss Prism.  [Quite crushed.]  Victoria.  The Brighton line.  [Sinks into
a chair.]

Jack.  I must retire to my room for a moment.  Gwendolen, wait here for
me.

Gwendolen.  If you are not too long, I will wait here for you all my
life.  [Exit Jack in great excitement.]

Chasuble.  What do you think this means, Lady Bracknell?

Lady Bracknell.  I dare not even suspect, Dr. Chasuble.  I need hardly
tell you that in families of high position strange coincidences are not
supposed to occur.  They are hardly considered the thing.

[Noises heard overhead as if some one was throwing trunks about.  Every
one looks up.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack seems strangely agitated.

Chasuble.  Your guardian has a very emotional nature.

Lady Bracknell.  This noise is extremely unpleasant.  It sounds as if he
was having an argument.  I dislike arguments of any kind.  They are
always vulgar, and often convincing.

Chasuble.  [Looking up.]  It has stopped now.  [The noise is redoubled.]

Lady Bracknell.  I wish he would arrive at some conclusion.

Gwendolen.  This suspense is terrible.  I hope it will last.  [Enter Jack
with a hand-bag of black leather in his hand.]

Jack.  [Rushing over to Miss Prism.]  Is this the hand-bag, Miss Prism?
Examine it carefully before you speak.  The happiness of more than one
life depends on your answer.

Miss Prism.  [Calmly.]  It seems to be mine.  Yes, here is the injury it
received through the upsetting of a Gower Street omnibus in younger and
happier days.  Here is the stain on the lining caused by the explosion of
a temperance beverage, an incident that occurred at Leamington.  And
here, on the lock, are my initials.  I had forgotten that in an
extravagant mood I had had them placed there.  The bag is undoubtedly
mine.  I am delighted to have it so unexpectedly restored to me.  It has
been a great inconvenience being without it all these years.

Jack.  [In a pathetic voice.]  Miss Prism, more is restored to you than
this hand-bag.  I was the baby you placed in it.

Miss Prism.  [Amazed.]  You?

Jack.  [Embracing her.]  Yes . . . mother!

Miss Prism.  [Recoiling in indignant astonishment.]  Mr. Worthing!  I am
unmarried!

Jack.  Unmarried!  I do not deny that is a serious blow.  But after all,
who has the right to cast a stone against one who has suffered?  Cannot
repentance wipe out an act of folly?  Why should there be one law for
men, and another for women?  Mother, I forgive you.  [Tries to embrace
her again.]

Miss Prism.  [Still more indignant.]  Mr. Worthing, there is some error.
[Pointing to Lady Bracknell.]  There is the lady who can tell you who you
really are.

Jack.  [After a pause.]  Lady Bracknell, I hate to seem inquisitive, but
would you kindly inform me who I am?

Lady Bracknell.  I am afraid that the news I have to give you will not
altogether please you.  You are the son of my poor sister, Mrs.
Moncrieff, and consequently Algernon's elder brother.

Jack.  Algy's elder brother!  Then I have a brother after all.  I knew I
had a brother!  I always said I had a brother!  Cecily,--how could you
have ever doubted that I had a brother?  [Seizes hold of Algernon.]  Dr.
Chasuble, my unfortunate brother.  Miss Prism, my unfortunate brother.
Gwendolen, my unfortunate brother.  Algy, you young scoundrel, you will
have to treat me with more respect in the future.  You have never behaved
to me like a brother in all your life.

Algernon.  Well, not till to-day, old boy, I admit.  I did my best,
however, though I was out of practice.

[Shakes hands.]

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  My own!  But what own are you?  What is your
Christian name, now that you have become some one else?

Jack.  Good heavens! . . . I had quite forgotten that point.  Your
decision on the subject of my name is irrevocable, I suppose?

Gwendolen.  I never change, except in my affections.

Cecily.  What a noble nature you have, Gwendolen!

Jack.  Then the question had better be cleared up at once.  Aunt Augusta,
a moment.  At the time when Miss Prism left me in the hand-bag, had I
been christened already?

Lady Bracknell.  Every luxury that money could buy, including
christening, had been lavished on you by your fond and doting parents.

Jack.  Then I was christened!  That is settled.  Now, what name was I
given?  Let me know the worst.

Lady Bracknell.  Being the eldest son you were naturally christened after
your father.

Jack.  [Irritably.]  Yes, but what was my father's Christian name?

Lady Bracknell.  [Meditatively.]  I cannot at the present moment recall
what the General's Christian name was.  But I have no doubt he had one.
He was eccentric, I admit.  But only in later years.  And that was the
result of the Indian climate, and marriage, and indigestion, and other
things of that kind.

Jack.  Algy!  Can't you recollect what our father's Christian name was?

Algernon.  My dear boy, we were never even on speaking terms.  He died
before I was a year old.

Jack.  His name would appear in the Army Lists of the period, I suppose,
Aunt Augusta?

Lady Bracknell.  The General was essentially a man of peace, except in
his domestic life.  But I have no doubt his name would appear in any
military directory.

Jack.  The Army Lists of the last forty years are here.  These delightful
records should have been my constant study.  [Rushes to bookcase and
tears the books out.]  M. Generals . . . Mallam, Maxbohm, Magley, what
ghastly names they have--Markby, Migsby, Mobbs, Moncrieff!  Lieutenant
1840, Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel, General 1869, Christian
names, Ernest John.  [Puts book very quietly down and speaks quite
calmly.]  I always told you, Gwendolen, my name was Ernest, didn't I?
Well, it is Ernest after all.  I mean it naturally is Ernest.

Lady Bracknell.  Yes, I remember now that the General was called Ernest,
I knew I had some particular reason for disliking the name.

Gwendolen.  Ernest!  My own Ernest!  I felt from the first that you could
have no other name!

Jack.  Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly
that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth.  Can you
forgive me?

Gwendolen.  I can.  For I feel that you are sure to change.

Jack.  My own one!

Chasuble.  [To Miss Prism.]  Laetitia!  [Embraces her]

Miss Prism.  [Enthusiastically.]  Frederick!  At last!

Algernon.  Cecily!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Lady Bracknell.  My nephew, you seem to be displaying signs of
triviality.

Jack.  On the contrary, Aunt Augusta, I've now realised for the first
time in my life the vital Importance of Being Earnest.

TABLEAU



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST***


******* This file should be named 844.txt or 844.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/8/4/844



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

