"My darling," said he, "I beg of you, for my sake and for our child's
sake, as well as for your own, that you will never for one instant
let that idea enter your mind! There is nothing so dangerous, so
fascinating, to a temperament like yours. It is a false and foolish
fancy. Can you not trust me as a physician when I tell you so?"

So of course I said no more on that score, and we went to sleep before
long. He thought I was asleep first, but I wasn't, and lay there for
hours trying to decide whether that front pattern and the back pattern
really did move together or separately.


On a pattern like this, by daylight, there is a lack of sequence, a
defiance of law, that is a constant irritant to a normal mind.

The color is hideous enough, and unreliable enough, and infuriating
enough, but the pattern is torturing.

You think you have mastered it, but just as you get well underway in
following, it turns a back-somersault and there you are. It slaps you
in the face, knocks you down, and tramples upon you. It is like a bad
dream.

The outside pattern is a florid arabesque, reminding one of a fungus.
If you can imagine a toadstool in joints, an interminable string of
toadstools, budding and sprouting in endless convolutions--why, that is
something like it.

That is, sometimes!

There is one marked peculiarity about this paper, a thing nobody seems
to notice but myself, and that is that it changes as the light changes.

When the sun shoots in through the east window--I always watch for that
first long, straight ray--it changes so quickly that I never can quite
believe it.

That is why I watch it always.

By moonlight--the moon shines in all night when there is a moon--I
wouldn't know it was the same paper.

At night in any kind of light, in twilight, candle light, lamplight, and
worst of all by moonlight, it becomes bars! The outside pattern I mean,
and the woman behind it is as plain as can be.

I didn't realize for a long time what the thing was that showed behind,
that dim sub-pattern, but now I am quite sure it is a woman.

By daylight she is subdued, quiet. I fancy it is the pattern that keeps
her so still. It is so puzzling. It keeps me quiet by the hour.

I lie down ever so much now. John says it is good for me, and to sleep
all I can.

Indeed he started the habit by making me lie down for an hour after each
meal.

It is a very bad habit I am convinced, for you see I don't sleep.

And that cultivates deceit, for I don't tell them I'm awake--O no!

The fact is I am getting a little afraid of John.

He seems very queer sometimes, and even Jennie has an inexplicable look.

It strikes me occasionally, just as a scientific hypothesis,--that
perhaps it is the paper!

I have watched John when he did not know I was looking, and come into
the room suddenly on the most innocent excuses, and I've caught him
several times LOOKING AT THE PAPER! And Jennie too. I caught Jennie with
her hand on it once.

She didn't know I was in the room, and when I asked her in a quiet, a
very quiet voice, with the most restrained manner possible, what she
was doing with the paper--she turned around as if she had been caught
stealing, and looked quite angry--asked me why I should frighten her so!

Then she said that the paper stained everything it touched, that she had
found yellow smooches on all my clothes and John's, and she wished we
would be more careful!

Did not that sound innocent? But I know she was studying that pattern,
and I am determined that nobody shall find it out but myself!


Life is very much more exciting now than it used to be. You see I have
something more to expect, to look forward to, to watch. I really do eat
better, and am more quiet than I was.

John is so pleased to see me improve! He laughed a little the other day,
and said I seemed to be flourishing in spite of my wall-paper.

I turned it off with a laugh. I had no intention of telling him it was
BECAUSE of the wall-paper--he would make fun of me. He might even want
to take me away.

I don't want to leave now until I have found it out. There is a week
more, and I think that will be enough.


I'm feeling ever so much better! I don't sleep much at night, for it
is so interesting to watch developments; but I sleep a good deal in the
daytime.

In the daytime it is tiresome and perplexing.

There are always new shoots on the fungus, and new shades of yellow
all over it. I cannot keep count of them, though I have tried
conscientiously.

It is the strangest yellow, that wall-paper! It makes me think of all
the yellow things I ever saw--not beautiful ones like buttercups, but
old foul, bad yellow things.

But there is something else about that paper--the smell! I noticed it
the moment we came into the room, but with so much air and sun it was
not bad. Now we have had a week of fog and rain, and whether the windows
are open or not, the smell is here.

It creeps all over the house.

I find it hovering in the dining-room, skulking in the parlor, hiding in
the hall, lying in wait for me on the stairs.

It gets into my hair.

Even when I go to ride, if I turn my head suddenly and surprise
it--there is that smell!

Such a peculiar odor, too! I have spent hours in trying to analyze it,
to find what it smelled like.

It is not bad--at first, and very gentle, but quite the subtlest, most
enduring odor I ever met.

In this damp weather it is awful, I wake up in the night and find it
hanging over me.

It used to disturb me at first. I thought seriously of burning the
house--to reach the smell.

But now I am used to it. The only thing I can think of that it is like
is the COLOR of the paper! A yellow smell.

There is a very funny mark on this wall, low down, near the mopboard.
A streak that runs round the room. It goes behind every piece of
furniture, except the bed, a long, straight, even SMOOCH, as if it had
been rubbed over and over.

I wonder how it was done and who did it, and what they did it for. Round
and round and round--round and round and round--it makes me dizzy!


I really have discovered something at last.

Through watching so much at night, when it changes so, I have finally
found out.

The front pattern DOES move--and no wonder! The woman behind shakes it!

Sometimes I think there are a great many women behind, and sometimes
only one, and she crawls around fast, and her crawling shakes it all
over.

Then in the very bright spots she keeps still, and in the very shady
spots she just takes hold of the bars and shakes them hard.

And she is all the time trying to climb through. But nobody could climb
through that pattern--it strangles so; I think that is why it has so
many heads.

They get through, and then the pattern strangles them off and turns them
upside down, and makes their eyes white!

If those heads were covered or taken off it would not be half so bad.


I think that woman gets out in the daytime!

And I'll tell you why--privately--I've seen her!

I can see her out of every one of my windows!

It is the same woman, I know, for she is always creeping, and most women
do not creep by daylight.

I see her on that long road under the trees, creeping along, and when a
carriage comes she hides under the blackberry vines.

I don't blame her a bit. It must be very humiliating to be caught
creeping by daylight!

I always lock the door when I creep by daylight. I can't do it at night,
for I know John would suspect something at once.

And John is so queer now, that I don't want to irritate him. I wish he
would take another room! Besides, I don't want anybody to get that woman
out at night but myself.
