Jack.  A severe chill, it seems.

Miss Prism.  As a man sows, so shall he reap.

Chasuble.  [Raising his hand.]  Charity, dear Miss Prism, charity!  None
of us are perfect.  I myself am peculiarly susceptible to draughts.  Will
the interment take place here?

Jack.  No.  He seems to have expressed a desire to be buried in Paris.

Chasuble.  In Paris!  [Shakes his head.]  I fear that hardly points to
any very serious state of mind at the last.  You would no doubt wish me
to make some slight allusion to this tragic domestic affliction next
Sunday.  [Jack presses his hand convulsively.]  My sermon on the meaning
of the manna in the wilderness can be adapted to almost any occasion,
joyful, or, as in the present case, distressing.  [All sigh.]  I have
preached it at harvest celebrations, christenings, confirmations, on days
of humiliation and festal days.  The last time I delivered it was in the
Cathedral, as a charity sermon on behalf of the Society for the
Prevention of Discontent among the Upper Orders.  The Bishop, who was
present, was much struck by some of the analogies I drew.

Jack.  Ah! that reminds me, you mentioned christenings I think, Dr.
Chasuble?  I suppose you know how to christen all right?  [Dr. Chasuble
looks astounded.]  I mean, of course, you are continually christening,
aren't you?

Miss Prism.  It is, I regret to say, one of the Rector's most constant
duties in this parish.  I have often spoken to the poorer classes on the
subject.  But they don't seem to know what thrift is.

Chasuble.  But is there any particular infant in whom you are interested,
Mr. Worthing?  Your brother was, I believe, unmarried, was he not?

Jack.  Oh yes.

Miss Prism.  [Bitterly.]  People who live entirely for pleasure usually
are.

Jack.  But it is not for any child, dear Doctor.  I am very fond of
children.  No! the fact is, I would like to be christened myself, this
afternoon, if you have nothing better to do.

Chasuble.  But surely, Mr. Worthing, you have been christened already?

Jack.  I don't remember anything about it.

Chasuble.  But have you any grave doubts on the subject?

Jack.  I certainly intend to have.  Of course I don't know if the thing
would bother you in any way, or if you think I am a little too old now.

Chasuble.  Not at all.  The sprinkling, and, indeed, the immersion of
adults is a perfectly canonical practice.

Jack.  Immersion!

Chasuble.  You need have no apprehensions.  Sprinkling is all that is
necessary, or indeed I think advisable.  Our weather is so changeable.  At
what hour would you wish the ceremony performed?

Jack.  Oh, I might trot round about five if that would suit you.

Chasuble.  Perfectly, perfectly!  In fact I have two similar ceremonies
to perform at that time.  A case of twins that occurred recently in one
of the outlying cottages on your own estate.  Poor Jenkins the carter, a
most hard-working man.

Jack.  Oh!  I don't see much fun in being christened along with other
babies.  It would be childish.  Would half-past five do?

Chasuble.  Admirably!  Admirably!  [Takes out watch.]  And now, dear Mr.
Worthing, I will not intrude any longer into a house of sorrow.  I would
merely beg you not to be too much bowed down by grief.  What seem to us
bitter trials are often blessings in disguise.

Miss Prism.  This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind.

[Enter Cecily from the house.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack!  Oh, I am pleased to see you back.  But what horrid
clothes you have got on!  Do go and change them.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!

Chasuble.  My child! my child!  [Cecily goes towards Jack; he kisses her
brow in a melancholy manner.]

Cecily.  What is the matter, Uncle Jack?  Do look happy!  You look as if
you had toothache, and I have got such a surprise for you.  Who do you
think is in the dining-room?  Your brother!

Jack.  Who?

Cecily.  Your brother Ernest.  He arrived about half an hour ago.

Jack.  What nonsense!  I haven't got a brother.

Cecily.  Oh, don't say that.  However badly he may have behaved to you in
the past he is still your brother.  You couldn't be so heartless as to
disown him.  I'll tell him to come out.  And you will shake hands with
him, won't you, Uncle Jack?  [Runs back into the house.]

Chasuble.  These are very joyful tidings.

Miss Prism.  After we had all been resigned to his loss, his sudden
return seems to me peculiarly distressing.

Jack.  My brother is in the dining-room?  I don't know what it all means.
I think it is perfectly absurd.

[Enter Algernon and Cecily hand in hand.  They come slowly up to Jack.]

Jack.  Good heavens!  [Motions Algernon away.]

Algernon.  Brother John, I have come down from town to tell you that I am
very sorry for all the trouble I have given you, and that I intend to
lead a better life in the future.  [Jack glares at him and does not take
his hand.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, you are not going to refuse your own brother's hand?

Jack.  Nothing will induce me to take his hand.  I think his coming down
here disgraceful.  He knows perfectly well why.

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, do be nice.  There is some good in every one.  Ernest
has just been telling me about his poor invalid friend Mr. Bunbury whom
he goes to visit so often.  And surely there must be much good in one who
is kind to an invalid, and leaves the pleasures of London to sit by a bed
of pain.

Jack.  Oh! he has been talking about Bunbury, has he?

Cecily.  Yes, he has told me all about poor Mr. Bunbury, and his terrible
state of health.

Jack.  Bunbury!  Well, I won't have him talk to you about Bunbury or
about anything else.  It is enough to drive one perfectly frantic.

Algernon.  Of course I admit that the faults were all on my side.  But I
must say that I think that Brother John's coldness to me is peculiarly
painful.  I expected a more enthusiastic welcome, especially considering
it is the first time I have come here.

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, if you don't shake hands with Ernest I will never
forgive you.

Jack.  Never forgive me?

Cecily.  Never, never, never!

Jack.  Well, this is the last time I shall ever do it.  [Shakes with
Algernon and glares.]

Chasuble.  It's pleasant, is it not, to see so perfect a reconciliation?
I think we might leave the two brothers together.

Miss Prism.  Cecily, you will come with us.

Cecily.  Certainly, Miss Prism.  My little task of reconciliation is
over.

Chasuble.  You have done a beautiful action to-day, dear child.

Miss Prism.  We must not be premature in our judgments.

Cecily.  I feel very happy.  [They all go off except Jack and Algernon.]

Jack.  You young scoundrel, Algy, you must get out of this place as soon
as possible.  I don't allow any Bunburying here.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  I have put Mr. Ernest's things in the room next to yours, sir.
I suppose that is all right?

Jack.  What?

Merriman.  Mr. Ernest's luggage, sir.  I have unpacked it and put it in
the room next to your own.

Jack.  His luggage?

Merriman.  Yes, sir.  Three portmanteaus, a dressing-case, two hat-boxes,
and a large luncheon-basket.

Algernon.  I am afraid I can't stay more than a week this time.

Jack.  Merriman, order the dog-cart at once.  Mr. Ernest has been
suddenly called back to town.

Merriman.  Yes, sir.  [Goes back into the house.]

Algernon.  What a fearful liar you are, Jack.  I have not been called
back to town at all.

Jack.  Yes, you have.

Algernon.  I haven't heard any one call me.

Jack.  Your duty as a gentleman calls you back.

Algernon.  My duty as a gentleman has never interfered with my pleasures
in the smallest degree.

Jack.  I can quite understand that.

Algernon.  Well, Cecily is a darling.

Jack.  You are not to talk of Miss Cardew like that.  I don't like it.

Algernon.  Well, I don't like your clothes.  You look perfectly
ridiculous in them.  Why on earth don't you go up and change?  It is
perfectly childish to be in deep mourning for a man who is actually
staying for a whole week with you in your house as a guest.  I call it
grotesque.

Jack.  You are certainly not staying with me for a whole week as a guest
or anything else.  You have got to leave . . . by the four-five train.

Algernon.  I certainly won't leave you so long as you are in mourning.  It
would be most unfriendly.  If I were in mourning you would stay with me,
I suppose.  I should think it very unkind if you didn't.

Jack.  Well, will you go if I change my clothes?

Algernon.  Yes, if you are not too long.  I never saw anybody take so
long to dress, and with such little result.

Jack.  Well, at any rate, that is better than being always over-dressed
as you are.

Algernon.  If I am occasionally a little over-dressed, I make up for it
by being always immensely over-educated.

Jack.  Your vanity is ridiculous, your conduct an outrage, and your
presence in my garden utterly absurd.  However, you have got to catch the
four-five, and I hope you will have a pleasant journey back to town.  This
Bunburying, as you call it, has not been a great success for you.

[Goes into the house.]

Algernon.  I think it has been a great success.  I'm in love with Cecily,
and that is everything.

[Enter Cecily at the back of the garden.  She picks up the can and begins
to water the flowers.]  But I must see her before I go, and make
arrangements for another Bunbury.  Ah, there she is.

Cecily.  Oh, I merely came back to water the roses.  I thought you were
with Uncle Jack.

Algernon.  He's gone to order the dog-cart for me.

Cecily.  Oh, is he going to take you for a nice drive?

Algernon.  He's going to send me away.

Cecily.  Then have we got to part?

Algernon.  I am afraid so.  It's a very painful parting.

Cecily.  It is always painful to part from people whom one has known for
a very brief space of time.  The absence of old friends one can endure
with equanimity.  But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one
has just been introduced is almost unbearable.

Algernon.  Thank you.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is at the door, sir.  [Algernon looks appealingly
at Cecily.]

Cecily.  It can wait, Merriman for . . . five minutes.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  [Exit Merriman.]

Algernon.  I hope, Cecily, I shall not offend you if I state quite
frankly and openly that you seem to me to be in every way the visible
personification of absolute perfection.

Cecily.  I think your frankness does you great credit, Ernest.  If you
will allow me, I will copy your remarks into my diary.  [Goes over to
table and begins writing in diary.]

Algernon.  Do you really keep a diary?  I'd give anything to look at it.
May I?

Cecily.  Oh no.  [Puts her hand over it.]  You see, it is simply a very
young girl's record of her own thoughts and impressions, and consequently
meant for publication.  When it appears in volume form I hope you will
order a copy.  But pray, Ernest, don't stop.  I delight in taking down
from dictation.  I have reached 'absolute perfection'.  You can go on.  I
am quite ready for more.

Algernon.  [Somewhat taken aback.]  Ahem!  Ahem!

Cecily.  Oh, don't cough, Ernest.  When one is dictating one should speak
fluently and not cough.  Besides, I don't know how to spell a cough.
[Writes as Algernon speaks.]

Algernon.  [Speaking very rapidly.]  Cecily, ever since I first looked
upon your wonderful and incomparable beauty, I have dared to love you
wildly, passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.

Cecily.  I don't think that you should tell me that you love me wildly,
passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.  Hopelessly doesn't seem to make
much sense, does it?

Algernon.  Cecily!

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is waiting, sir.

Algernon.  Tell it to come round next week, at the same hour.

Merriman.  [Looks at Cecily, who makes no sign.]  Yes, sir.

[Merriman retires.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack would be very much annoyed if he knew you were
staying on till next week, at the same hour.

Algernon.  Oh, I don't care about Jack.  I don't care for anybody in the
whole world but you.  I love you, Cecily.  You will marry me, won't you?

Cecily.  You silly boy!  Of course.  Why, we have been engaged for the
last three months.

Algernon.  For the last three months?

Cecily.  Yes, it will be exactly three months on Thursday.

Algernon.  But how did we become engaged?

Cecily.  Well, ever since dear Uncle Jack first confessed to us that he
had a younger brother who was very wicked and bad, you of course have
formed the chief topic of conversation between myself and Miss Prism.  And
of course a man who is much talked about is always very attractive.  One
feels there must be something in him, after all.  I daresay it was
foolish of me, but I fell in love with you, Ernest.

Algernon.  Darling!  And when was the engagement actually settled?

Cecily.  On the 14th of February last.  Worn out by your entire ignorance
of my existence, I determined to end the matter one way or the other, and
after a long struggle with myself I accepted you under this dear old tree
here.  The next day I bought this little ring in your name, and this is
the little bangle with the true lover's knot I promised you always to
wear.

Algernon.  Did I give you this?  It's very pretty, isn't it?

Cecily.  Yes, you've wonderfully good taste, Ernest.  It's the excuse
I've always given for your leading such a bad life.  And this is the box
in which I keep all your dear letters.  [Kneels at table, opens box, and
produces letters tied up with blue ribbon.]

Algernon.  My letters!  But, my own sweet Cecily, I have never written
you any letters.

Cecily.  You need hardly remind me of that, Ernest.  I remember only too
well that I was forced to write your letters for you.  I wrote always
three times a week, and sometimes oftener.

Algernon.  Oh, do let me read them, Cecily?

Cecily.  Oh, I couldn't possibly.  They would make you far too conceited.
[Replaces box.]  The three you wrote me after I had broken off the
engagement are so beautiful, and so badly spelled, that even now I can
hardly read them without crying a little.

Algernon.  But was our engagement ever broken off?

Cecily.  Of course it was.  On the 22nd of last March.  You can see the
entry if you like. [Shows diary.]  'To-day I broke off my engagement with
Ernest.  I feel it is better to do so.  The weather still continues
charming.'

Algernon.  But why on earth did you break it off?  What had I done?  I
had done nothing at all.  Cecily, I am very much hurt indeed to hear you
broke it off.  Particularly when the weather was so charming.

Cecily.  It would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it
hadn't been broken off at least once.  But I forgave you before the week
was out.

Algernon.  [Crossing to her, and kneeling.]  What a perfect angel you
are, Cecily.

Cecily.  You dear romantic boy.  [He kisses her, she puts her fingers
through his hair.]  I hope your hair curls naturally, does it?

Algernon.  Yes, darling, with a little help from others.

Cecily.  I am so glad.

Algernon.  You'll never break off our engagement again, Cecily?

Cecily.  I don't think I could break it off now that I have actually met
you.  Besides, of course, there is the question of your name.

Algernon.  Yes, of course.  [Nervously.]

Cecily.  You must not laugh at me, darling, but it had always been a
girlish dream of mine to love some one whose name was Ernest.  [Algernon
rises, Cecily also.]  There is something in that name that seems to
inspire absolute confidence.  I pity any poor married woman whose husband
is not called Ernest.

Algernon.  But, my dear child, do you mean to say you could not love me
if I had some other name?

Cecily.  But what name?

Algernon.  Oh, any name you like--Algernon--for instance . . .

Cecily.  But I don't like the name of Algernon.

Algernon.  Well, my own dear, sweet, loving little darling, I really
can't see why you should object to the name of Algernon.  It is not at
all a bad name.  In fact, it is rather an aristocratic name.  Half of the
chaps who get into the Bankruptcy Court are called Algernon.  But
seriously, Cecily . . . [Moving to her] . . . if my name was Algy,
couldn't you love me?

Cecily.  [Rising.]  I might respect you, Ernest, I might admire your
character, but I fear that I should not be able to give you my undivided
attention.

Algernon.  Ahem!  Cecily!  [Picking up hat.]  Your Rector here is, I
suppose, thoroughly experienced in the practice of all the rites and
ceremonials of the Church?

Cecily.  Oh, yes.  Dr. Chasuble is a most learned man.  He has never
written a single book, so you can imagine how much he knows.

Algernon.  I must see him at once on a most important christening--I mean
on most important business.

Cecily.  Oh!

Algernon.  I shan't be away more than half an hour.

Cecily.  Considering that we have been engaged since February the 14th,
and that I only met you to-day for the first time, I think it is rather
hard that you should leave me for so long a period as half an hour.
Couldn't you make it twenty minutes?

Algernon.  I'll be back in no time.

[Kisses her and rushes down the garden.]

Cecily.  What an impetuous boy he is!  I like his hair so much.  I must
enter his proposal in my diary.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  A Miss Fairfax has just called to see Mr. Worthing.  On very
important business, Miss Fairfax states.

Cecily.  Isn't Mr. Worthing in his library?

Merriman.  Mr. Worthing went over in the direction of the Rectory some
time ago.

Cecily.  Pray ask the lady to come out here; Mr. Worthing is sure to be
back soon.  And you can bring tea.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  [Goes out.]

Cecily.  Miss Fairfax!  I suppose one of the many good elderly women who
are associated with Uncle Jack in some of his philanthropic work in
London.  I don't quite like women who are interested in philanthropic
work.  I think it is so forward of them.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  Miss Fairfax.

[Enter Gwendolen.]

[Exit Merriman.]

Cecily.  [Advancing to meet her.]  Pray let me introduce myself to you.
My name is Cecily Cardew.

Gwendolen.  Cecily Cardew?  [Moving to her and shaking hands.]  What a
very sweet name!  Something tells me that we are going to be great
friends.  I like you already more than I can say.  My first impressions
of people are never wrong.

Cecily.  How nice of you to like me so much after we have known each
other such a comparatively short time.  Pray sit down.

Gwendolen.  [Still standing up.]  I may call you Cecily, may I not?

Cecily.  With pleasure!

Gwendolen.  And you will always call me Gwendolen, won't you?

Cecily.  If you wish.

Gwendolen.  Then that is all quite settled, is it not?

Cecily.  I hope so.  [A pause.  They both sit down together.]

Gwendolen.  Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my
mentioning who I am.  My father is Lord Bracknell.  You have never heard
of papa, I suppose?

Cecily.  I don't think so.

Gwendolen.  Outside the family circle, papa, I am glad to say, is
entirely unknown.  I think that is quite as it should be.  The home seems
to me to be the proper sphere for the man.  And certainly once a man
begins to neglect his domestic duties he becomes painfully effeminate,
does he not?  And I don't like that.  It makes men so very attractive.
Cecily, mamma, whose views on education are remarkably strict, has
brought me up to be extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so
do you mind my looking at you through my glasses?

Cecily.  Oh! not at all, Gwendolen.  I am very fond of being looked at.

Gwendolen.  [After examining Cecily carefully through a lorgnette.]  You
are here on a short visit, I suppose.

Cecily.  Oh no!  I live here.

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Really?  Your mother, no doubt, or some female
relative of advanced years, resides here also?

Cecily.  Oh no!  I have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.

Gwendolen.  Indeed?

Cecily.  My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the
arduous task of looking after me.

Gwendolen.  Your guardian?

Cecily.  Yes, I am Mr. Worthing's ward.

Gwendolen.  Oh!  It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a
ward.  How secretive of him!  He grows more interesting hourly.  I am not
sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed
delight.  [Rising and going to her.]  I am very fond of you, Cecily; I
have liked you ever since I met you!  But I am bound to state that now
that I know that you are Mr. Worthing's ward, I cannot help expressing a
wish you were--well, just a little older than you seem to be--and not
quite so very alluring in appearance.  In fact, if I may speak candidly--

Cecily.  Pray do!  I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to
say, one should always be quite candid.

Gwendolen.  Well, to speak with perfect candour, Cecily, I wish that you
were fully forty-two, and more than usually plain for your age.  Ernest
has a strong upright nature.  He is the very soul of truth and honour.
Disloyalty would be as impossible to him as deception.  But even men of
the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the
influence of the physical charms of others.  Modern, no less than Ancient
History, supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to.
If it were not so, indeed, History would be quite unreadable.

Cecily.  I beg your pardon, Gwendolen, did you say Ernest?

Gwendolen.  Yes.

Cecily.  Oh, but it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is my guardian.  It is
his brother--his elder brother.

Gwendolen.  [Sitting down again.]  Ernest never mentioned to me that he
had a brother.

Cecily.  I am sorry to say they have not been on good terms for a long
time.

Gwendolen.  Ah! that accounts for it.  And now that I think of it I have
never heard any man mention his brother.  The subject seems distasteful
to most men.  Cecily, you have lifted a load from my mind.  I was growing
almost anxious.  It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across
a friendship like ours, would it not?  Of course you are quite, quite
sure that it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is your guardian?

Cecily.  Quite sure.  [A pause.]  In fact, I am going to be his.

Gwendolen.  [Inquiringly.]  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  [Rather shy and confidingly.]  Dearest Gwendolen, there is no
reason why I should make a secret of it to you.  Our little county
newspaper is sure to chronicle the fact next week.  Mr. Ernest Worthing
and I are engaged to be married.

Gwendolen.  [Quite politely, rising.]  My darling Cecily, I think there
must be some slight error.  Mr. Ernest Worthing is engaged to me.  The
announcement will appear in the _Morning Post_ on Saturday at the latest.

Cecily.  [Very politely, rising.]  I am afraid you must be under some
misconception.  Ernest proposed to me exactly ten minutes ago.  [Shows
diary.]

Gwendolen.  [Examines diary through her lorgnettte carefully.]  It is
certainly very curious, for he asked me to be his wife yesterday
afternoon at 5.30.  If you would care to verify the incident, pray do so.
[Produces diary of her own.]  I never travel without my diary.  One
should always have something sensational to read in the train.  I am so
sorry, dear Cecily, if it is any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I
have the prior claim.

Cecily.  It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen,
if it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to
point out that since Ernest proposed to you he clearly has changed his
mind.

Gwendolen.  [Meditatively.]  If the poor fellow has been entrapped into
any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once,
and with a firm hand.

Cecily.  [Thoughtfully and sadly.]  Whatever unfortunate entanglement my
dear boy may have got into, I will never reproach him with it after we
are married.

Gwendolen.  Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement?  You
are presumptuous.  On an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a
moral duty to speak one's mind.  It becomes a pleasure.

Cecily.  Do you suggest, Miss Fairfax, that I entrapped Ernest into an
engagement?  How dare you?  This is no time for wearing the shallow mask
of manners.  When I see a spade I call it a spade.

Gwendolen.  [Satirically.]  I am glad to say that I have never seen a
spade.  It is obvious that our social spheres have been widely different.

[Enter Merriman, followed by the footman.  He carries a salver, table
cloth, and plate stand.  Cecily is about to retort.  The presence of the
servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls
chafe.]

Merriman.  Shall I lay tea here as usual, Miss?

Cecily.  [Sternly, in a calm voice.]  Yes, as usual.  [Merriman begins to
clear table and lay cloth.  A long pause.  Cecily and Gwendolen glare at
each other.]

Gwendolen.  Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss
Cardew?

Cecily.  Oh! yes! a great many.  From the top of one of the hills quite
close one can see five counties.

Gwendolen.  Five counties!  I don't think I should like that; I hate
crowds.

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  I suppose that is why you live in town?  [Gwendolen
bites her lip, and beats her foot nervously with her parasol.]

Gwendolen.  [Looking round.]  Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss
Cardew.

Cecily.  So glad you like it, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.

Cecily.  Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in
London.

Gwendolen.  Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist
in the country, if anybody who is anybody does.  The country always bores
me to death.

Cecily.  Ah!  This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression,
is it not?  I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it
just at present.  It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been
told.  May I offer you some tea, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  [With elaborate politeness.]  Thank you.  [Aside.]  Detestable
girl!  But I require tea!

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  Sugar?

Gwendolen.  [Superciliously.]  No, thank you.  Sugar is not fashionable
any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up the tongs and puts four
lumps of sugar into the cup.]

Cecily.  [Severely.]  Cake or bread and butter?

Gwendolen.  [In a bored manner.]  Bread and butter, please.  Cake is
rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.

Cecily.  [Cuts a very large slice of cake, and puts it on the tray.]  Hand
that to Miss Fairfax.

[Merriman does so, and goes out with footman.  Gwendolen drinks the tea
and makes a grimace.  Puts down cup at once, reaches out her hand to the
bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake.  Rises in
indignation.]

Gwendolen.  You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I
asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake.  I am
known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary
sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.

Cecily.  [Rising.]  To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the
machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not
go.

Gwendolen.  From the moment I saw you I distrusted you.  I felt that you
were false and deceitful.  I am never deceived in such matters.  My first
impressions of people are invariably right.

Cecily.  It seems to me, Miss Fairfax, that I am trespassing on your
valuable time.  No doubt you have many other calls of a similar character
to make in the neighbourhood.

[Enter Jack.]

Gwendolen.  [Catching sight of him.]  Ernest!  My own Ernest!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  Darling!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Gwendolen.  [Draws back.]  A moment!  May I ask if you are engaged to be
married to this young lady?  [Points to Cecily.]

Jack.  [Laughing.]  To dear little Cecily!  Of course not!  What could
have put such an idea into your pretty little head?

Gwendolen.  Thank you.  You may!  [Offers her cheek.]

Cecily.  [Very sweetly.]  I knew there must be some misunderstanding,
Miss Fairfax.  The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is
my guardian, Mr. John Worthing.

Gwendolen.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  This is Uncle Jack.

Gwendolen.  [Receding.]  Jack!  Oh!

[Enter Algernon.]

Cecily.  Here is Ernest.

Algernon.  [Goes straight over to Cecily without noticing any one else.]
My own love!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Cecily.  [Drawing back.]  A moment, Ernest!  May I ask you--are you
engaged to be married to this young lady?

Algernon.  [Looking round.]  To what young lady?  Good heavens!
Gwendolen!

Cecily.  Yes! to good heavens, Gwendolen, I mean to Gwendolen.

Algernon.  [Laughing.]  Of course not!  What could have put such an idea
into your pretty little head?

Cecily.  Thank you.  [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.]  You may.
[Algernon kisses her.]

Gwendolen.  I felt there was some slight error, Miss Cardew.  The
gentleman who is now embracing you is my cousin, Mr. Algernon Moncrieff.

Cecily.  [Breaking away from Algernon.]  Algernon Moncrieff!  Oh!  [The
two girls move towards each other and put their arms round each other's
waists as if for protection.]

Cecily.  Are you called Algernon?

Algernon.  I cannot deny it.

Cecily.  Oh!

Gwendolen.  Is your name really John?

Jack.  [Standing rather proudly.]  I could deny it if I liked.  I could
deny anything if I liked.  But my name certainly is John.  It has been
John for years.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  A gross deception has been practised on both of
us.

Gwendolen.  My poor wounded Cecily!

Cecily.  My sweet wronged Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  [Slowly and seriously.]  You will call me sister, will you
not?  [They embrace.  Jack and Algernon groan and walk up and down.]

Cecily.  [Rather brightly.]  There is just one question I would like to
be allowed to ask my guardian.

Gwendolen.  An admirable idea!  Mr. Worthing, there is just one question
I would like to be permitted to put to you.  Where is your brother
Ernest?  We are both engaged to be married to your brother Ernest, so it
is a matter of some importance to us to know where your brother Ernest is
at present.

Jack.  [Slowly and hesitatingly.]  Gwendolen--Cecily--it is very painful
for me to be forced to speak the truth.  It is the first time in my life
that I have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really
quite inexperienced in doing anything of the kind.  However, I will tell
you quite frankly that I have no brother Ernest.  I have no brother at
all.  I never had a brother in my life, and I certainly have not the
smallest intention of ever having one in the future.

Cecily.  [Surprised.]  No brother at all?

Jack.  [Cheerily.]  None!

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Had you never a brother of any kind?

Jack.  [Pleasantly.]  Never.  Not even of an kind.

Gwendolen.  I am afraid it is quite clear, Cecily, that neither of us is
engaged to be married to any one.

Cecily.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to
find herself in.  Is it?

Gwendolen.  Let us go into the house.  They will hardly venture to come
after us there.

Cecily.  No, men are so cowardly, aren't they?

[They retire into the house with scornful looks.]

Jack.  This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I
suppose?

Algernon.  Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is.  The most
wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.

Jack.  Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.

Algernon.  That is absurd.  One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one
chooses.  Every serious Bunburyist knows that.

Jack.  Serious Bunburyist!  Good heavens!

Algernon.  Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life.  I happen to be serious about Bunburying.
What on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea.
About everything, I should fancy.  You have such an absolutely trivial
nature.

Jack.  Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this
wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded.  You
won't be able to run down to the country quite so often as you used to
do, dear Algy.  And a very good thing too.

Algernon.  Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear Jack?  You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was.  And not a bad thing either.

Jack.  As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your
taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my ward.

Algernon.  I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a
brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss Fairfax.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin.

Jack.  I wanted to be engaged to Gwendolen, that is all.  I love her.

Algernon.  Well, I simply wanted to be engaged to Cecily.  I adore her.

Jack.  There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.

Algernon.  I don't think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss
Fairfax being united.

Jack.  Well, that is no business of yours.

Algernon.  If it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it.  [Begins to
eat muffins.]  It is very vulgar to talk about one's business.  Only
people like stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties.

Jack.  How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this
horrible trouble, I can't make out.  You seem to me to be perfectly
heartless.

Algernon.  Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner.  The butter
would probably get on my cuffs.  One should always eat muffins quite
calmly.  It is the only way to eat them.

Jack.  I say it's perfectly heartless your eating muffins at all, under
the circumstances.

Algernon.  When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles
me.  Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me
intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.  At
the present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy.  Besides, I
am particularly fond of muffins.  [Rising.]

Jack.  [Rising.]  Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in
that greedy way. [Takes muffins from Algernon.]

Algernon.  [Offering tea-cake.]  I wish you would have tea-cake instead.
I don't like tea-cake.

Jack.  Good heavens!  I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own
garden.

Algernon.  But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat
muffins.

Jack.  I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances.
That is a very different thing.

Algernon.  That may be.  But the muffins are the same.  [He seizes the
muffin-dish from Jack.]

Jack.  Algy, I wish to goodness you would go.

Algernon.  You can't possibly ask me to go without having some dinner.
It's absurd.  I never go without my dinner.  No one ever does, except
vegetarians and people like that.  Besides I have just made arrangements
with Dr. Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of
Ernest.

Jack.  My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better.  I
made arrangements this morning with Dr. Chasuble to be christened myself
at 5.30, and I naturally will take the name of Ernest.  Gwendolen would
wish it.  We can't both be christened Ernest.  It's absurd.  Besides, I
have a perfect right to be christened if I like.  There is no evidence at
all that I have ever been christened by anybody.  I should think it
extremely probable I never was, and so does Dr. Chasuble.  It is entirely
different in your case.  You have been christened already.

Algernon.  Yes, but I have not been christened for years.

Jack.  Yes, but you have been christened.  That is the important thing.

Algernon.  Quite so.  So I know my constitution can stand it.  If you are
not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think
it rather dangerous your venturing on it now.  It might make you very
unwell.  You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely
connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a
severe chill.

Jack.  Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.

Algernon.  It usen't to be, I know--but I daresay it is now.  Science is
always making wonderful improvements in things.

Jack.  [Picking up the muffin-dish.]  Oh, that is nonsense; you are
always talking nonsense.

Algernon.  Jack, you are at the muffins again!  I wish you wouldn't.
There are only two left.  [Takes them.]  I told you I was particularly
fond of muffins.

Jack.  But I hate tea-cake.

Algernon.  Why on earth then do you allow tea-cake to be served up for
your guests?  What ideas you have of hospitality!

Jack.  Algernon!  I have already told you to go.  I don't want you here.
Why don't you go!

Algernon.  I haven't quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one
muffin left.  [Jack groans, and sinks into a chair.  Algernon still
continues eating.]

ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


Morning-room at the Manor House.

[Gwendolen and Cecily are at the window, looking out into the garden.]

Gwendolen.  The fact that they did not follow us at once into the house,
as any one else would have done, seems to me to show that they have some
sense of shame left.

Cecily.  They have been eating muffins.  That looks like repentance.

Gwendolen.  [After a pause.]  They don't seem to notice us at all.
Couldn't you cough?

Cecily.  But I haven't got a cough.

Gwendolen.  They're looking at us.  What effrontery!

Cecily.  They're approaching.  That's very forward of them.

Gwendolen.  Let us preserve a dignified silence.

Cecily.  Certainly.  It's the only thing to do now.  [Enter Jack followed
by Algernon.  They whistle some dreadful popular air from a British
Opera.]

